alright so i ended the last video by
saying that we can put any kind of data
into any column in sql lite which is a
bit strange
so let's actually try doing that and what I might do is just clear and do a .quit
and going to a clear and then just go
back in so we can sort of see this at
the top a little bit easy to read and
i'm just going to do a select here
.....so let's now try and put in
any kind of data into these columns so
going to type....
....
that would have work but forgot semicolon...now it work I have
just put string data into an integer
column which is actually believe it or
not is fine in sql lite just to
confirm that will select....
....and there's our record you can
see the string number we put in the
second entry here which was numbers in
other cases has worked quite happily so
we enter the string wherein where number
would ordinarily have been placed now
as a Java programmer who's learning
java in android course you might actually
be horrified by what you've just seen
and in fact doing things like that can
cause problems when you try to get the
data back from a java program now if your
code tries to put that phone number into
an integer variable then it is going to
crash if you switch databases and try to
use the same code in say Microsoft sql
server then it won't work either
because the main client server sql
databases do actually check the type of
data that goes into columns so make
sure you use an appropriate type for the columns when you create your tables
now one thing that does sql lite lacks is an altar table command for
changing things like the type of the
columns
there's actually ways around that
creating a new table and moving the data
from the old table into it for example
but it's really best to get it right
first time
alright so now we know how to create a
table and insert some data or some
rows into it but we can also update the
data that's in their now firstly
going to use the . backup command to
make a backup of the table you'll see
why in a minute
the command is . back up and then you
tell it which database to backup then
the filename you want to back up to
if we don't tell which database you want
to backup and it does the current one
which is fine and makes the command very
easy to use for this case I'm just going
to do test back up like so
notice that this is a sql lite
command not a sql statement so
there's no need to put a semicolon at
the end if it starts with a . it's a
sql lite command . first or semicolon
last but not both gonna press enter
their alright so I backed it up so moving on
let's say we now have steves email
address we want to update his record in
the table we actually do that using the
update statement so we type in update....
.....so here i'm updating the email
address in the contacts table but you
actually have to be careful with this
command i haven't at the moment told
it which row to update
so it's going to update every row in the
table i'm going to add the semicolon
now and press enter and now if I type....you can see
what happened there
everyone has the same email address
which is almost certainly not what we
want to happen so the update command is
a very powerful command and a single
sql statement can update hundreds of
thousands of rows in the database so you
want to be very careful when using the
update command
especially in an interactive session
like this you can render the data in
your database useless and believe me I've done
it updated tens of thousands of records
when I only intended to update one in a
production database before and just
without going into too much detail cause
a lot of grief for all concerned but
luckily this time I backed up the
database first so we can get it back and
do the update properly so i can type in
. restore test back up and then i can
actually check the data is back doing....you can see
we've got our data back with the
original entries alright so how do we
update just steve record to do that what
we need to do is we still need to use
the update command but we need to add a
where clause i'm going to type....
......
.....and press
enter now that's more like what was
required only steves record has now been
updated so that's how to use a where
clause is just the word where followed
by condition that identifies a row or
set of rows to be updated and you
probably see now that's why back ups
are also very important now where clause
can be used with many sql statements
so you could display just a subset of
the data by using a where clause with
the select statement just do a select just to make sure all
entries are there and we've got his
email address has been updated you can
see they've all got individual email
addresses and steves email addresses now
been updated so we can also use that
where clause in a select statement so we
can do something like.....you can
see that's come back and showed only one
entry perhaps more useful though if we
already know the name theirs no point
retrieving data that we don't need so we
could do something like....
....you see that just returns
the email the phone number and the email
address so that is select insert update
and we can also delete records
no prizes for guessing what the command
is you gotta it delete so.....
and once again we have to be very
carefully here without a where clause to
specify which row should be deleted the
commandant will apple to the entire set of
rows in the database and yes i have done
that as well so putting the where clause
in here....
we know that 1234 was the phone number
that we entered for brian so i'm going to
press ENTER there and I'm going to do a
select command....
and you can see that Brian is now
missing from that list and that's
because we've deleted his record by
doing using the delete sql statement
and using the where clause which
specified his phone number so we've now
seen a few sql statements create
insert select update and delete these
are the most common commands that you
need and you can do a lot with sql
databases with just those commands there
are a few ways to modify the command
especially the Select statement and
we'll be having a look at using join in
the next video to relate tables together
but that's the basics and hopefully you
feel a bit happy about having to learn a
new language and you've seen its
really not going to be perhaps as
difficult as you thought it might be
working with sql lite from the
command line like this is very useful
because you can concentrate on the
details of your tables and columns and
get everything right before trying to
include the command in code it gets better
too because there's a couple of sql lite commands that you can use once
everything set up so let's have a look
at a few of those the first one we can
type is . tables and . tables lists all
the tables in the database which can be
handy when you have a lot of them and
forget what about when you know what you
actually called one
the next one . schema that print out the
structure of your tables now we only
have one table in this database you can
see how it shows the sql commands
that was used to create it so you can
copy that command and paste it into
code when you want to create tables in
code will create that table in code and
you've got several tables then . schema
followed by a table name will put the
structure for just that one table and
there's also . dump and that
gives you the sequel statement for
creating the table but all the inserts
necessary to populate it with the data
that's in it so it wraps the whole thing
and what's called a transaction you can
see we've got the begin transaction
and commits there and we'll be talking about
that little bit later but again you can
copy and paste the output from dumped
into your code and finally . exit or .
quit will actually exit the sql lite
shell and take you back to your command
prompt or terminal session so that's the
basic introduction to sql lite and
these sql language now the sql lite shell is useful when you need to
design your database and it's generally
easy to use some sort of front end to the
database when setting things up so that
you can make sure you've got all the
tables created correctly with the right
columns and so on
you can also test the queries that
you be using your code before you get
around to writing the code so you know
that the sql side of things has been
set up correctly and is working ok so we now
seen how to create tables and insert
update and delete the record in them and
we've also had a brief look at querying
the data in a table so in the next video
we're going to work with a database that
already has some data in it so we can
practice querying data a bit more and
also look at to how to join tables
together so see you in the next video